---
title: "
Organising my first conference"
date: 2020-09-16
tags: ["astronomy", "supernova"]
draft: false
---

Every year [SEPnet](http://www.sepnet.ac.uk/) gives the opportunity to a group of postgraduate researchers (PGRs) to organise a two-days student-led conference hosted in Southampton. I first came to know about this when I applied for a talk at the Astronomy conference from 2019 ([From Infinity to Zero: the history of the Universe in redshift](http://www.sepnet.ac.uk/call-for-abstracts-from-infinity-to-zero-the-history-of-the-universe-in-redshift-3-5-april-2019/)). These type of conferences are perfect for early career researchers as it is organised by student, for students, although a few academic speakers are also invited. You do not feel the same pressure as with the big international conferences where you find all the "big names" from your research field. In addition, you also get to know lots of people in the same career stages as you and share experiences. 

After the conference I attended was over, I got very interested in organising one of my own. Therefore, I talked to **Elizabeth Swann**, the lead organiser of the 2019 meeting, to ask her for advise (this was really helpful!). I got very excited with the idea, so I decided to ask around in my Astronomy departement (University of Southampton) for fellow PGRs interested in organising a conference together and started writing a proposal. It happened that, at the same time, a group of PGRs from the University of Hertfordshire were writing one of their own. They kindly suggested to work together instead of compiting, so we started collaborating on a single proposal (afterall, isn't this what research is all about?).

Choosing the topic of the conference was relatively easy. As many big telescopes and surveys are coming in the near future, we thought it might be a good idea to focus on big data and machine learning, thus, the title of the conference: [The Big Data Era in Astronomy](https://sites.google.com/view/the-big-data-era-in-astronomy/home). Finding academic speakers wasn't too hard either. As several of us in the [organising committee](https://sites.google.com/view/the-big-data-era-in-astronomy/committee) work on different fields, we quickly came up with a list of candidates. **Cristobel Soares-Smith** was in charge of most of the logistics (including funding) and she was also very helpful with her advice, so we mainly had to focus on the structure, science and social events (for example, a conference dinner) of the meeting. Everything was going great as the start of the conference was approaching, however, everything changed when the COVID-19 pandemic struck.

Many things were quite uncertain at that time. We didn't know how long and how much this pandemic would affect everyone, so we had to postpone the conference. As time started passing by, we grew impasient. We didn't know if we were going to have the opportunity to host the meeting or if we would have to cancel it. Eventually, we decided to do what many other conferences, schools and workshops were doing, choose a new date and go virtual!

This was full of challenges. We didn't have to worry about funding, conference dinner and other things, but we did have to think about the proper platforms to host our virtual conference on. Thankfully, all Universities in SEPnet have access to **Microsoft Teams**, thus, we chose it as our platform for hosting the talks. In addition, **Slack** is widely used in academic environments as it is perfect for asynchronous discussions, questions, announcements, etc. We also decided to use **Slido** for the questions at the end of each talk, which was quite new to all of us (I got to know about Slido during an [ESO](https://www.eso.org/public/) conference in June).

Unfortunately, as things were still uncertain close to the new date of the conference in September, many of the students were unable to attend. Therefore, we had to shorten the length of the conference from two to one day, and cut the number of sessions by half. However, the conference turned out better than expected. From the feedback of the participants we learnt that the length of the conference (including the length of talks, breaks, etc.) was of their liking. Furthermore, the platforms used (Microsoft Teams, Slack, Slido) were really useful and the attendees found that the conference was worth assisting. Nonetheless, most of them, given the opportunity to choose, would prefer an in-person meeting instead of a virtual one.

Networking and interacting with other people online is not as easy as in person. It is hard to have spontaneous and/or informal encounters. So, from my point of view, hosting a virtual conference has many advantages (for example, it is cheaper, easier to organise, no need to travel, etc.) and is a great option given the current circumstances, but it would always lack the face-to-face interaction which is a big part of these events. However, it is clear that the pandemic has opened a new window to future conferences as virtual meeting are becoming more common and reliable than in the past.
